>> A revealing new study on
human evolution and brain
development.
Could this lend credence
to the stoned ape
theory of brain evolution?
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
About 800,000 to 300,000
years ago, the human brain
experienced a massive and
accelerated growth spurt.
Scientists have offered
many different explanations
for how and why this occurred.
But a new study out of Boston
Children's Hospital focused
on a fast evolving
set of human genome
called Human Accelerated
Regions or HARs.
Previous studies have
found about 3,100 HARs
during brain development.
But the team at
Children's Hospital
determined one HAR, gene
PPP1R17 could be responsible for
or play a significant role
in rapid brain development.
Further, they discovered this
works differently in humans
than in other animals.
Ben Stewart, host
of Gaia's Limitless
on the significance
of this study.
>> These regions of the
human DNA may hold some kind
of an answer at the rapid
explosion of human neocortex.
Because if you think of
it, evolutionarily there's
not been one creature at
least on planet Earth that
has been studied that had
any organ increase in size as
large and as rapidly
as the human brain did.
So there's definitely some
unanswered questions there.
I'm pretty sure that
these HARs regions are
being looked at for
something very unique
in the evolution of the brain.
And my own personal
twist on it is
this also might
be important when
we start looking at
brain machine interfaces
and how the brain
can potentially
cause mutations to
adapt to technological--
some kind of technology in
the brain to enhance or evolve
the human brain.
>> How could this new discovery
be related to the stoned ape
theory?
>> There's a possibility that
the stoned ape theory could
lead into this.
Now, the stoned ape
theory was really
popularized by Terence McKenna.
Over time, you would have
some of our ancient ancestors,
hominids, that
would be following
around bovine creatures, cows.
And in the cow
patties, in the fields,
they would naturally having
followed these creatures around
for hundreds of thousands of
years, whatever it might have
been, that they
would have started
eating the mushrooms, the
psilocybin mushrooms that
grow naturally in cow patties.
These experiences, tickling the
language centers of the brain
and other parts of the
brain, bringing down
the rigidity of the
default mode network
and activating other
communication hubs
within the brain.
That could actually explain
for the rapid explosion
of the human neocortex.
In this article,
they're saying that
these human accelerated regions
act differently in humans
than they do in primates or
creatures like mice and ferrets
that they've looked into now.
So potentially, if there is some
connection with the stoned ape
theory that psychedelics
or psychotropics helped
in the expansion of
the human neocortex
and made us as at least
psychologically so much
different than all the rest
of the creatures on Earth,
then there may be
something to look at here.
>> If this is proven to be true,
what's the big takeaway from
this?
How does knowing where
we come from help us now?
>> The more we understand
about who we are,
where we've come from, the more
we can understand what it is
that we're even doing here.
Is there a purpose?
Is there a trajectory
for human growth
or development or evolution
that we don't even know about?
So the more we
look into our past,
paradoxically, and even
spiritually many traditions
say that, having a better
route on where we've come from
gives us a much more
clear vision as to where
we're going as a species.
Where we can go,
not where we think
we're going like this
is out of our hands,
but where can we take
what's happening?
How can we see where we've come
from as a species, what life
has always been like, what
it seems to be like now,
and look into the
future of how does
the development of the
brain make us unique,
make us different;
what kind of gifts
can we serve the planet
and humanity with?
And I mean, I think now is
probably the best time for us
to really start looking into
what can we do to maybe right
some of the wrongs and maybe
heal some of the trauma
that we have caused
on the planet?
This rapid expansion of the
human neocortex is the problem,
and inherent within that
problem is also the solution.
We've created this mess and also
we're gifted with the ability
to be able to transcend what
we've done to see how we
can make it through this alive.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.